[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We're not just wanting
to make people aware of some
of the challenges which we
face in the 21st century,
but also that there are ways
in which people can be part
of the solution.
And for me, permaculture is
a good way of doing that.
I think it's
important to realize
that it builds on
lots of wisdom,
particularly Indigenous
people's wisdom from the past.
And it's just kind of putting
a modern slant on that
because we can learn from
what people have done.
We can learn from their
mistakes and their successes.
Why a rooftop?
We didn't have
anywhere else where
we could have put a garden.
Flat roof is an
obvious wasted space.
And so if you look at it
from permaculture terms,
it's something
that's going begging.
It's way of maximizing the use
of whatever resources we have.
It ticks all the permaculture
boxes, if you like.
This was just a couple of years
after the garden was planted.
And it just kind of
shows how compared
with what you have now, which is
a very densely planted forest,
that it actually started
off as a sort of thing
which you would do in your own
backyard with immature plants
that you would get
from the nursery.
And just how we've allowed
it to slowly evolve.
So this is that very, very much
reinforcing that whole kind
of thing about slow and steady.
What people find most
amazing about our garden
is that we've got huge
6, 7 meter high trees,
and it's all growing on 30
centimeters of substrate.
The garden is 200 square meters
altogether, so it's not huge.
But we've really
planted it intensively.
So we've got about
190 different species
and varieties of useful plants.
So a whole range of edibles,
medicinals, stuff for dyeing,
stuff for fiber.
So it's a whole range of plants
which show how important plants
are to human existence.
Most of the plants
are perennials,
but also come from other
temperate regions of the world.
So if you look at
the labels, you'll
see that there's a lot of
stuff from China, Japan,
as well as North
America and Europe.
And then in that sort of belt
going across through Central
Asia, Turkey as well.
So that explains the kind
of diversity that we have.
And so it's quite interesting
that there's a tendency
to think that in
a lot of planting
has got to be sort of natives.
And we'd make the argument
that actually with climate
change, with the kind of
challenges with climate change
that we do need to be
looking at all kinds
of other climatic
zones for plants,
which are going to be adaptable
to our conditions here.
There's very much a sort of
South American flavor here.
We call it the three sisters.
So Native Americans had a
really interesting polyculture.
So they combined
different plants.
And the sum was
greater than the parts.
So the various sisters
collaborated with each other.
So one sister would
be the sweet corn,
and that provided a stem for
another sister, the climbing
bean, to climb up.
The bean fixed
nitrogen in its roots,
and so that helped to
feed the other sisters.
And the third sister, which we
don't have here at the moment,
is the pumpkin or the squash.
So that crawls all over the bed.
It helps big leaves.
It helps to reduce the
amount of water required.
It conserves moisture and also
it helps to suppress weeds.
So that's just one system
that's demonstration
of how people can use
polycultures to increase
the productivity and to
reduce the maintenance
in their gardens.
The Incas were amazing
agriculturalists.
They had really, really
sophisticated systems
where they used canals
as a way to store water,
so that their gardens wouldn't
get affected by the frost.
And they're also--
they develop lots.
They domesticated lots
and lots of plants.
So things like quinoa.
So with more and more people
going on gluten-free diets,
people are looking at growing
quinoa commercially here
in the UK.
And also it's great
ornamental value.
And I think that's one of
the lessons of designing
using permaculture principles
is that aesthetics can be part
of your design considerations.
And so obviously, bringing
different sort of color
in with the kind of
productivity, the edibility.
This is blue sausage tree.
So it comes from China and
quite an interesting form.
So just from a normal
ornamental point of view,
it's something that's great
to plant on your estate.
And then these are the fruit.
So early in the spring, you get
a really, really pretty sort
of bell-shaped flower
which hangs down,
and then it forms three
tiny little pods which
are joined top and bottom.
And then as they grow, they--
see that's your three pods.
And then this time of
year when they're ripe,
you open up the seeds,
you get these black seeds
with that white flesh.
So you just-- quite
a delicate flavor.
And if you're not in polite
company, you just spit them out.
There's definitely a sort of
a Chinese flavor around here.
So this is a loquat.
Great ornamental value.
These little candelabra of
the new shoots coming out.
It's evergreen.
And with climate change, this is
a possibility as a fruiting tree
because it likes
long, hot summers.
And so what's interesting is
how more and more farmers,
more and more growers are
looking to new varieties of nuts
and fruit trees, which are going
to thrive with climate change.
And so climate change provides
opportunities, as well as
challenges.
So from a permaculture
point of view
and particularly the whole kind
of forest garden community,
we're looking at
new varieties which
are going to be at our
disposal as climate changes.
So this is another Inca plant.
And if you went to a
marketplace in South America,
you'd see lots and lots
of different varieties,
along with lots of different
varieties of potato.
And there's some interesting
open source research
going on now, trying to develop
new varieties of oca which
cope with our climate,
because one of the problems
is that the oca, the
tubers put on their size,
their weight when days shorten.
The trouble is, in
this climate, that also
corresponds with the frosts.
And so they never
get really big.
And so we're looking at giving
lots of different varieties
to lots of volunteers
who are growing them
and then selecting out
those varieties of oca that
do well in our climate.
Nature plants are the world's
best Nobel Prize winning
biochemist.
That all the compounds which
we could ever want in medicine
is actually already out there.
The challenge is for us to
find out what's going to work.
We've got examples like
aspirin or whatever
already of these plants
which have contributed
to our pharmacopeia.
But the challenge is to
find out the new ones.
The problem is
we're destroying it.
And so again, just
looking at our garden,
introducing people to some
of the medicinal plants here,
just then switches
people on to we really
do need to preserve the
kind of biodiversity
because it's in our
self-interest, if nothing else.
So that's another way in
which we use the garden.
This is Artemisia annua.
And last year, the
Nobel Prize for medicine
was won jointly by a Chinese
lady, who for over 30 years,
had done research
into cures for malaria
and found in old manuscripts,
found descriptions
of traditional
cures for malaria,
and worked out that they were
talking about this plant.
So she did 30 years of
research into its value
as a cure for malaria, and then
last year won the Nobel Prize.
So this is now,
particularly as malaria
is becoming resistant to a lot
of the traditional medicines,
quinine, that kind of
thing, chloroquine,
then this is now an extract from
this is being used medicinally
around the world.
This is the one
that has the skull
and crossbones because
this plant here is toxic.
You see the berries.
This is American pokeweed.
So it comes from the US.
And this absolutely
gorgeous bunch of fruit
looks a bit like an elderberry.
But all parts of the plant
are poisonous because they
undermine your immune system.
But if you treat it right, and
this is true of so many plants
that actually are poisonous.
But if you treat it right,
then they're edible.
If you boil up the leaves, it
then neutralizes the toxins
and it can be used like spinach.
The other great thing
about this garden
is that you learn from
the people who visit it.
So we had an Australian
woman who came here
and she said that
in Australia, they
use the berries to
make an extract, which
is an antidote to snake bites.
So it undermines
your immune system.
But if you use it
in the right way,
it also then strengthens
your immune system as a cure.
Right from the
beginning, we want
to make the garden as
sustainable as possible.
So say, in the hard
landscaping, we
use a lot of renewable material.
And then also renewable energy.
So we inherited a small wind
turbine and some solar array.
So, I mean, Britain sort of is
lagging behind other countries
in terms of renewables.
But hopefully,
what we've got here
is just a useful
indicator to visitors
about how they can
integrate renewable energy
into the whole kind of plan,
the whole sustainability
of the building, because
the garden is very much
the part of the whole complex.
We take waste from the cafe
downstairs and vegetable waste,
it's composted here.
So it's trying to close those
circles within the envelope
of the building,
harvesting the rainwater
so that it doesn't go into the
stormwater drainage system.
The roof garden also helps
to insulate the building.
It provides sound attenuation
because we have quite a lot
of gigs in the main hall.
And so it reduces
the sound level.
And also on a bigger
front, it contributes
to addressing some
of the big issues
with climate change
of increasing
temperatures in urban areas.
And so having green space
helps to cool urban areas.
Permaculture is nothing new.
I've worked a lot in
developing countries,
particularly in the
Philippines and Nepal.
And there when you see,
it's just what farmers do.
People have been
innovating continually.
What we have today is a product
of that whole kind of process
of human creativity, addressing
challenges, facing problems,
coming up with solutions.
It may have appeared in the
'70s, but actually its roots,
its heart is in the
whole of human existence.
[MUSIC PLAYING]